thank you so much
it's a real honor to be here
um i'm going to tell you a story about
three grandchildren
and
i'm going to tell that story through a
lens that i think you will find to me is
very interesting somewhat moving
the first grandchild is me
uh i am a grandchild and uh this is a
fact i'm a grandchild of the weizmann
not very people know this my mentor who
i met last week uh paul berg uh was at
the weizmann for a long time actually he
spent a significant amount of his
sabbaticals uh at the weizmann and in
fact i saw him in california this week
paula is the person who invented
recombinant dna technology genetic
engineering the entire field
spent a significant amount of time there
so i have have a have a lineage of
dissent from the weizmann that's the
first grandchild but i'll move on to two
more grandchildren as we go along with
my slides
the question
that is on everyone's minds i think
constantly is where are we on cancer our
news is inundated
about news about cancer we hear about it
every day
and when i was writing my book i felt we
had lost the forest for the trees or the
trees for the forest we didn't know
which direction we didn't know whether
we were moving backwards forward
sideways and that's the question that's
really burning on us we needed a
landscape map a road map to tell us
where are we
how do we get here and what happens next
i'm going to try to tell you a little
bit about my views about this and i'm
going to try to project out into the
future about what happens next i think
in this disease that has lived with us
for a very very long time
cancer is not a modern disease we think
of it as a modernist in fact it's an
ancient illness it was present not only
in an old document it's present in one
of the oldest medical documents beyond
the edwin smith papyrus which describes
a woman with breast cancer it's also
present in ancient specimens we know it
to be a fact because it's present in
actual the actual tumors can be found
that's a picture of a bone tumor from a
mummy from 2000 bc
and in fact just as there were there was
cancer in the ancient world there were
theories of cancer in the ancient world
and there was always a link between
trying to understand the project of
reason to try to understand what cancer
is and therefore how to treat cancer
galen and visalias the great surgeons
tried to create theories of cancer or
the most prominent theories of cancer
the longest theory that actually ever
existed was the idea that cancer was a
disease caused by an excess of black
bile in the body so galen famously
claimed that there were only four fluids
blood phlegm black bile and yellow bile
and all of pathology could be explained
by the systemic alteration of these four
fluids i call it a hydraulic theory of
pathology one goes up one goes down and
therefore you have anything galen also
hypothesized that there was only one
other disease that would be tracked back
to an excessive black bile and that was
depression and there's something very
moving about the idea that right from
the ancient world cancer and depression
were linked in this way in psychic and
humoral theories of the black bile
but i like to think about the history of
cancer the whole spectrum as it were to
condense it down into four basic
movements sort of four basic movements
of a sonata
the first movement of that appears
sometime in the 1860s and 1870s we think
of this as something quite taken we were
there's an idea that's percolated so
much that we actually have assumed that
it's to be true but in in the 1860s and
1870s it was first discovered this was a
deeply radical idea about cancer
remember people thought it was black
bile
humors something in the air a
malfeasance etc and then all of a sudden
a young man not young in this picture
but a young man 32 years old rudolph
virkow in berlin looked down the
microscope and he found something that
was really surprising at the time and
that was that regardless of where these
cancers seem to come from melanoma
breast cancer leukemia cancer of the
blood they all had a common link and the
common link was that there was an
overproduction over proliferation of
cells cells were growing where they
should not be growing and he
hypothesized again a radical hypothesis
for his time that cancer was there for a
disease of cellular origin somewhere in
the body a cell started to grow but it
shouldn't be growing and it couldn't
stop growing and therefore that was
the origin of cancer he had a theory
about that he called this omnic cellular
cellular from cells come more cells and
that was the origin of the pathological
the pathological proliferation called
cancer
and of course as i said there's always a
match between theory
and practice and cancer
and that that theory led to the golden
age of cancer surgery the hypothesis
being that if cancer originates locally
in a cell that doesn't know how to stop
dividing then taking out that cell or
the family of cells around it would
therefore cure cancer it's an important
theory and this of course led to the
great surgical operations for cancer
this is a picture of bill roth operating
in vienna already we've seen we're
beginning to see the global reach of
this disease bill roth operating in
vienna and bill roth was visited in his
uh vienna uh clinic by a young man who
would leave his real mark on cancer
surgery and that was william stewart
halstead halstead was a surgeon who was
originally in new york practice not far
from here and then moved to
the
move to johns hopkins in baltimore where
he set up probably the most important
cancer surgery
discipline cancer surgery clinic of its
time and here he is again operating on
breast cancer now halsted's theory of
cancer if you really remember this
theory because it will come back to us
halsted's theory of cancer followed that
idea cancer is a disease of cells it
originates in cells it originates in a
nidus and if you remove that nidus of
proliferating cells you'll cure cancer
and halsted made a very important
corollary from this statement and that
was that if you if you cut more
of the nitis out you'll cure more cancer
that if you move much more of the tissue
and in fact he argued that the reason
that women were not being cured for
breast cancer okay breast cancer was
something particularly that helped with
institution was because they were not
the surgeon was not cutting enough and
he called it mistaken kindness and he
began to therefore extend the boundaries
of the surgery towards not only the
mastectomy the removal of the breast but
to ultimately a super radical and an
ultra radical mastectomy again in
service of the theory that if that if
cancer originated in a single cell then
cutting more cells would mean removing
the cancer
now the problem of course which we'll
come to in a second was that there was
the theory was all correct
except for one very very important
conceptual error and the conceptual
error that goes back in some ways to
galen and that is that cancer does
originate of course in a single cell
it's a proliferation of single cell but
it also has a systemic component the
black bile thing that galen was talking
about that is that it tends to spread
outside that single point
and therefore if you take a woman if a
woman happens to have metastatic breast
cancer
which is of course
lots of women present in metastatic
breast cancer then cutting more local
breast cancer won't save her life
because the disease has already moved
outside the body and this was a
conceptual error it was a cycle of
conceptual errors that halsted was stuck
in
and not only helps it this is a whole
series of physicians of that time and so
while they were able to perform
extremely aggressive surgery more and
more aggressive surgery putting
literally tens of thousands and hundreds
of thousands of women under the knife in
order to really take out the cancer from
the body they really could not cure that
fraction of breast cancer that already
moved outside the medici into the
metastatic realm
so already there was a challenge to this
original theory that yes cancer was a
disease of cells but there had to be
something more there's such to be
something systemic about cancer and that
we had to attack cancer in a systemic
way and this was shown by a series of
trials it took 100 years to run these
trials this was shown by a series of
trials which were performed first in the
united states in canada in israel
ultimately which showed that regardless
of whether you performed more or more
more and more aggressive local surgery
it did not really cure cancer when it
had spread out that off of the local
sites
and
similarly at that same time there were a
series of
advancements in in local therapy for
cancer this is a picture of marie curie
uh and a picture of one of one of the
early radiation devices and here too
very successful at killing and curing
local cancers still use this child is
from the 1950s actually being treated
for an eye tumor still survives today
but would begin to fail once the cancer
had spread outside the local site in the
body
so then the question arose could there
be a systemic therapy
could there be a systemic therapy and
willie meyer who practiced in new york
as well began to wonder he was a breast
cancer surgeon and wonder could there be
a therapy that would be more than just
local therapy that would augment local
therapy for cancer
and perhaps in a curious or an ironic
twist to the story the first local the
first systemic therapies would literally
come out of war gas as we talk about the
war on cancer in a kind of ironic twist
to the story the first systemic
therapies were in fact war gases this is
a picture of a bombing at barry harbor
where
some mustard gas was released on allied
soldiers and very soon after
pathologists noted that in fact these
soldiers would survive the war gas
bombings had
had a profound depletion of their white
blood cells
and this was a time when of course this
was a time when any poison any cellular
poison because cancer was a cellular
growth problem any cellular poison such
as a war gas could be evaluated as an
anti-cancer agent
so it was a very promising lead and in
fact very quickly these war gases were
adapted for therapy for the um for the
for the use systemic therapy as
chemotherapy and this is the birth of
chemotherapy for cancer and in fact
diluted versions of these mustard gases
were used in the 1940s and 1950s as
agents that would stop the growth of
cancer cells and they were successful
the first ones were quite successful
but unfortunately the patients still
died afterwards they would have a
remission followed by a death afterwards
so there was a tantalizing hint that if
you could stop the growth of these
cancer cells and somehow consolidate
that that blockage of growth you would
get to a complete cure for cancer in
addition to surgery and radiation
therapy
um which brings me to the second the
second grandchild it's an interesting
story uh in the 1940s following these
leads a physician named sidney farber
began to he was in boston that time he
began to work on trying to find other
such chemical poisons cellular poisons
poisons of cellular growth that would
inhibit the growth of cells normal cells
and can cancer cells but in doing so
kill cancer sparing mostly normal cells
they're trying to figure out could there
be this was this was like a like a
narrow wedge that was driven a narrow
pharmacological wedge that was driven to
kill
cancer cells spare normal cells and
thereby deliver systemic therapy against
cancer now farber interesting story
himself uh was a um
farber when he was it was born in
buffalo and this was a time and it was
very very difficult for jewish medical
students to get
slots in medical schools in the united
states so in fact fabric had to go to
israel and he was partly for some time
he was he worked with people who were
actually the among the founders of the
whitesman uh he went there for a while
he was there in the 1930s and 1940s and
then went came back to the united states
and then only then after he had
completed much of his medical training
was able to come back to the united
states but i'm not i'm not at the
grandchild yet
so it turned out that sydney farber
began to explore these new chemicals
these new
anti-anti-proliferative chemicals
anti-chemicals that would kill cellular
growth
and he found one such chemical in
collaboration with an indian chemist and
up in up in new york and he began to use
these chemicals for the first time in
treating a very very aggressive variant
of leukemia called acute lymphoblastic
leukemia it's a disease that i treat
still a-l-l that's a very remember that
disease all we'll come back to it
and he began to inject the first
children with these therapies and again
found profound remissions
unfortunately they would all relapse and
die afterwards but once again this idea
that if you use a chemical a chemical
inhibitor of cellular growth you can
kill cancer cells maybe spare some
normal cells and if you do it with an
extreme precision you could cure or even
get into remission some of these uh
children so i became interested in
finding out that the child who was the
first child to receive this therapy
because he's in some ways in some ways
he's an intellectual grandfather for us
he is the person who originated the
first patient to try it and i became
obsessed with this idea while i was
writing my book
and i
knew that the child had lived in boston
and i knew his name was rs uh because
they had in farber's papers the names
are all made into initials and i knew
his name was rs so this was i call this
the hunt for rs i began to hunt for this
child because i need to know the story
of this child in order to recreate and
bring him alive to some extent
and i began to write emails
frantically in 2005 2006
and
there was nothing no response
so i was in boston i was in the library
working on my book then and i thought
well you know i got dejected this was
2006 i went to my parents house in delhi
and someone told me remember the indian
chemist that farber had collaborated
with someone told me that indian chemist
has only one biographer in the entire
world
and happened to live five blocks from my
parents house so i said okay fine i'll
go and visit this chemist this
biographer of this chemist the chemist
died unfortunately and
spent the entire evening with him i left
um and he as i was leaving he said to me
again remember this is 6000 miles away
from from where this clinic was he says
to me oh you know in the 1970s i visited
sydney farber's clinic and i have a
roster of all the patients he was
treating
would you like to look at this roster
and in that roster was this photograph
of a child whose name is robert sandler
and that was that first child his name
is robert sandler
so he is the second grandchild of the
whitesman
he
lived for about uh
seven months after his treatment and you
can say seven months you know who cares
about seven months for a child with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the
1940s and
seven months was a lifetime
no one had ever survived two weeks or
three weeks after the disease this was
considered a dramatic uh
result temporary remission this was the
paper uh written about it and uh and
therefore i dedicated my book to robert
sandler my book opens with a quote for
for him to robert sandler for those who
came before and after him now the
this is a circular story because of
course
the child was in boston i came back to
boston and i could go 15 minutes away
from where i was working i could go and
find actually where the child lives
lived
and so forth
um but there's another circle in this
story i want to pause for one second to
finish this circle
about a month after my book was
published i was working in my laboratory
actually on al we work on the same
disease and
i got a phone call in my office from
this gentleman
and it was the other twin
it's the twin of the of robert sandler
his name is elliot sandler now imagine
this disjunctive moment he walked into a
bookstore he lives in maine i never
would have found him uh he's not listed
anywhere
and opened a book and found the book
dedicated to his own twin brother
right because i
so
anyway he got in touch with me
and uh and then we've had a conversation
since then i don't know some people
might know ken burns is doing a film on
cancer in my book and in fact the film
opens with elliot sandler's memory of
robert sanders
remission so
the second grandchild keep that thought
i'll come back to him again
now this idea that you could use
cytotoxic poison cellular poisons
against cancer killing cancer cells
growing cancer cells and sparing normal
cells was really taken to its
nth place is its zenith by
further trials that added not one but
several and this is the birth of
combination chemotherapy it's a word
we'd understand every day but of course
this is where it was born and fry and
fryrick emil fry and iraq both working
at the national cancer institute then
began to extend this idea adding not one
but two three four and in the case of
all seven
such
anti-cellular proliferative drugs to
keep adding to the armamentarium and
driving this narrow pharmacological
wedge between killing cancer cells
sparing normal cells and in fact in this
disease
more than any other disease in this one
disease for childhood leukemia childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia they were
able to start getting cures miraculous
cures so the survival rate from
childhood all in the 1950s was zero
percent zero percent when that child
came in every child with all died of all
within weeks sometimes within months
by the 1960s the survival rate had
climbed up to 40 percent by the 1970s to
80 percent and we're now about 85 to 90
85 and 90 percent of these children are
now cured by using cytotoxic
chemotherapy anti-proliferative
cytoplasm
massive collaboration around the world
of of driving this effort forward bit by
bit by bit by bit
and this was this really created a kind
of
groundswell across the world again but
particularly united states of the idea
that you could you could now
pour pour money into cancer research
patients became involved patient
advocates became involved and this was
the founding of the war on cancer this
is mary lasker who of course has been
called a fairy godmother medical
research lived again few blocks uptown
from here and really began to use
everything at her disposal her wealth
but more importantly her charm her
friendships to really move she was not a
scientist but a friend of the scientists
i began to move the frontier of cancer
forward
leading she was actually a big
collaborator of sydney farber she and
sydney farber combined their efforts
together to launch what we now call the
war on cancer in 1969 if you were to
wake up in the morning you would open
the new york times or the washington
post and you would have this full page
advertisement mr nixon you can cure
cancer
and there you have in the 1960s both the
optimism that you can combine that you
we knew enough about cancer that you
could combine these
cancer therapies these cellular poisons
of cellular growth that you could
effectively by combining them you would
not cure just not cure just childhood
leukemia but all the other cancers as if
the key to the lock had been found
but unfortunately that key has was not
found so this is what happened this is
the increase of the national cancer
institute budget
following the so-called war on cancer
and these are the actual effects on
cancer mortality starting in the 1970s
moving out to the early 1990s sorry mid
1990s for men and for women the blue
curve is the actual mortality rate the
red curve of the expected mortality rate
so absolutely a difference but a
plateauing this is not the curve that
looks like this falling down rapidly
and even this curve and we should keep
the perspective on this even this curve
is complex so if you look at what this
really means and split it up by cancers
you begin to see a pattern and we'll
come back to this pattern and that is
that for some cancers there's lung
cancer over here dramatic declines in
death
caused by of course changes in smoking
habits for some cancers leukemia here
this line over here leukemia
the decline caused by treatment other
cancers like breast cancer combination
of screening treatment prevention and so
forth so you begin to see that not every
cancer is equal that there is even in
the response to these dramatically
improved therapies that there was a
divergence or a split
and so
this led to the second phase or the
second theory of cancer and that is
cancer is not just a disease of cells
but there's something underneath that if
you open up the cell and ask the
question why is that cell dividing
abnormally you find that in fact it's
dividing abnormally because the genes
that control cellular growth
adding and subtracting growth signals to
cells those genes have been disrupted in
cancer now again many of you might find
this idea very simple
it's very much part of our
our public vocabulary now but in the
1970s when this was announced was a
deeply radical idea that in fact the
very genes that control normal cellular
growth if you disrupt those genes you
get cancer cellular growth so in fact a
cell can be imagined in our bodies as as
as a computer that interprets growth
signals this is one of the fundamental
things that every cell does
and it interprets growth signals by
taking in some stuff from the
environment and saying should i grow or
should i not go every cell is making
that decision
and cancer is when that decision goes
wrong
when mutations in genes cause an
alteration in the decision and therefore
the cell now begins to proliferate
abnormally this was work done through
multiple years between 1970-1990 by
multiple people but i like this quote
from harold varmus which says that
ultimately this is the challenge of
cancer cancer is a distorted version of
normalcy and therefore no matter how
much you drive those
original chemotherapies those
chemotherapies that would kill cells you
can never get away from the fact that
cancer is a twin to us it is a
distortion of normalcy because growth is
required for everybody to heal to
reproduce
to grow
and this brings us to the third phase of
of of this revolution which is that
by the 1990s it was clear that not one
gene we talked briefly about this
two-hit hypothesis but by 99 it was
clear that not one gene is enough that
in fact more than one gene is enough
more than one gene is required so by the
1990s we knew certainly that alteration
and growth controlling genes cause
cancer the very genes that make our
hands grow our brains grow if you mutate
them you will now get a cell that
doesn't know how to stop dividing stop
growing but the question was how many of
them are there and how common are they
so this is the the multi-hit hypothesis
that we talked about and that is a very
simple idea and that is that every cell
contains not one growth signal but many
growth signals it's a computer as i said
it is interpreting growth signals from
the environment and multiple growth
signals are integrated much like an
integrated unit might figure out how to
assess these signals and the cell then
makes the decision to grow or not grow
to grow or die and unfortunately
fortunately for us there are many many
genes that control growth and in fact
cancer only arises not by one gene
mutation but by multiple gene mutations
they in fact are their natural
safeguards as it were in our body
because growth is such a complex process
that you need to disrupt multiple
signals to finish up ultimately getting
a cell that's cancer these are multiple
mutations
so now i'm going to spend two minutes
giving you the genomic view of cancer by
genome i mean every gene not one gene
but all the genes in the human body and
talk a little bit about how we see how i
see how the world sees cancer today and
i remember we've come such a long way
from that simple idea cancer originates
in one cell as cellular growth and this
is stay with me for a second because
this is i think a very important series
of slides and we'll set up the basis for
the last section
and that is that imagine a patient comes
in with uh
with breast cancer say and you have the
capacity which we do now of taking every
gene this is a blank sheet of paper to
start with taking every gene in the
human body starting with the first gene
here and the last gene there and marking
out the single mutations the single
changes in the growth controlling genes
that this woman has and they're here
about 10 odd genes and that's what you
do now here's the point a second woman
comes in also with breast cancer workout
looks down the microscope at her breast
cancer and they're identical looking
every breast cancer looks to him this
exactly the same malignant
proliferations of cells
and now you perform this a genetic map
of her cancer
and you see reassuringly that these
genes are the same still breast cancer
but here's one gene that's popped up
that is unique to her here's another
gene that's only unique to this one
specimen of breast cancer even though
anatomically microscopically these two
diseases look identical in the
microscope you do a third patient and
now you begin to encounter what we are
encountering as the next challenge which
is that cancer is a gene is a disease of
genomes not just one gene but many genes
and there is enormous diversity between
individual specimens of the same cancer
the diversity in fact mimics the
diversity of human beings themselves so
in other words every cancer at a genetic
level is its own cancer
and that begins to tell us why we're in
this place today it is not a disease
unlike many other diseases not a disease
of one gene it is not a disease it is a
disease of multiple genes and these
genes happen to be the very same genes
that control growth and that is the
challenge the challenge is how do we
then create therapies that are specific
to one person and yet can encompass
multiple cancers or multiple specimens
of the same cancer
this is that same view now
flattened out into a single sheet as it
were you can take the ones that are very
common make them big peaks take the ones
that are uncommon make them small peaks
and that's what the cancer genome looks
like this is colorectal cancer it's true
for breast cancer it's true for leukemia
this is this is this is called a
landscape view it's been pioneered by
several scientists but vogelstein and
others but here you have the landscape
view of cancer and now you have big
peaks for very commonly altered genes
and colorectal cancer intermediate size
peaks and then these small little dots
which are unique to one particular
specimen so now you begin to understand
the challenge that we face as
oncologists
but obviously when these maps began to
be known the first question was could
you direct
uh chemicals specific chemicals against
these very commonly altered genes and
this would be like killing cancer with
an achilles heel
as opposed to a bomb right so now you
find the exact mutations the exact
mutations that are causing these
alterations in cellular growth and can
you now target them using new molecular
therapies and start killing cancer cells
and in fact
that has started being done i call this
the age of targeted therapy as opposed
to the general killers of cellular
proliferating cells with a disease
called acute promial acidic leukemia one
of the first ones to start this actually
breast cancer with hormonal therapy is
one another example
and has become extremely uh you know
really entered our vocabulary really
with a drug called chronic myelogenous
leukemia and a drug called gleevec so a
disease called chronic myelogenous
leukemia and a drug for gleevec which
any you know it's to me it's kind of
beautiful because this is the actual
gene or protein rather which is which
drives the cancer cells one of these big
mutations in in chronic myelogenous
leukemia and it literally looks to me
like an arrow driven into a heal uh this
is a drug that will bind to the cleft of
that protein inactivate that protein and
thereby drive this cml into a profound
remission a profound remission
and that is the product of these
of understanding the cancer genome to
this to this point in this day and age
and this has been true for breast cancer
too this is a woman treated with
a an antibody that targets one such
mutation less common among all breast
cancers but still quite common
and she had breast cancer 16 years ago
the 16-year survivor of metastatic
breast cancer in halsted's clinic she
would have had an eviscerating
mastectomy and still died afterwards
because of course her disease had
already spread outside her body
but even that now has had challenges so
this is the age of targeted therapy and
we're leaving even that behind because
here is gleevec for cml chronic
myelogenous leukemia patients not
treated versus patients treated you see
a huge difference in survival
this is breast cancer with that second
drug i talked about herceptin patients
treated versus not treated again a huge
difference in survival but unlike
gleevec where the patients live and live
and live forever even patients treated
with herceptin for metastatic breast
cancer don't live as long as now we're
cut down to 50 months as opposed to 72
odd months
and this is melanoma
which shows you the melanoma is you know
the the latest uh
it is a disease that we are now
beginning to pour resources into and
again you see with targeted therapy
increases in survival but al in the end
the patients seem to acquire resistance
to these targeted therapies and now
we're down to 12 15 17 months so we are
now moving into yet another phase trying
to reimagine cancer saying okay the age
of cells is over the age of genes is
over the age of genomes is over what do
we do next
and
now
we've come to a stage in which
scientifically my laboratory other
laboratories have begun to realize that
even targeted therapy isn't enough we'll
have to do one more piece beyond
targeted therapy to get to that final
step and i like to think of this as
cancer as an organismal disease and that
is that it's not just genes it's not
just cells it's not just genomes it's
the entire organism that needs to be
considered cancer arises not in a vacuum
it rises in arises in real patients and
real human beings and interacts with
environments it's it's alive in the same
way that the cells the rest of the cells
of our body is alive so an organism of
course pertains to an organism as a
whole it's a physiology it's environment
it's interactions
we live by complex physiological
pathways we live within complex networks
there's an immune system that we possess
we possess in microenvironments our
bodies divided into or organs
and the stomach is very different from
the muscle for instance and that we
interact with complex environments
and this has led to the idea that cancer
is not just shouldn't be considered just
a as i said a cell growing in a vacuum
proliferating without any cause or
reason but in fact a cell growing in the
context of other mutations the cell
growing in the context of other cells
and this has created these these these
diagrams which look to some people as
impossibly complex but in fact are
beginning to capture the true complexity
of cancer in its environment now you
could say well that's great that's
wonderful what do we do with this
information but in fact this information
is actionable and i'll show you one
important actionable piece of this
information and that is that we're now
beginning to imagine cancer as not just
one piece here and somewhere in here it
says insensitivity to growth inhibitors
and self-sufficiency of growth signals
so it's not just growth right but in
fact there's a micro environment it
metastasizes it resists cellular death
and it sustains abnormal blood vessel
formation and that is what is
what is what is causing cancer this
diagram by the way is a very important
diagram and and uh dr dumani will talk a
little bit more about it has been called
the hallmarks of cancer diagram and that
is that cancer is not just
abnormal abnormalities in growth but in
fact it's abnormalities in multiple axes
of cellular physiology organismal
physiology including tissue invasion
microenvironment apoptosis angiogenesis
these words that will come up later in
the in the following sessions but let me
end then
with the story of the third grandchild
and that is a woman named emma whitehead
i'll tell you emma whitehead story and
that's the last story i'm going to tell
you today so going back to this idea the
hallmarks of cancer cancer is not just a
disease of abnormal proliferation of
cells not just an abnormal abnormal
accumulation of mutations in gene not
just
not just abnormal genomes but in fact an
abnormal organismal disease so
this is a young lady who also had
leukemia all acute lymphoblastic
leukemia she's eight years old lives in
philadelphia and she was treated much as
sydney farber's patients would have been
treated with
things that
block the proliferation of cells
standard chemotherapy killing cells
sparing normal cells and trying to get
her and her first remission lasted about
two months so here's a girl eight years
old has the first remission lasts about
two months back in the leukemic phase
they brought her into a second remission
and decided to do a bone marrow
transplant on her
um and they were preparing for that bone
marrow transplant the donor had been
prepped for the bone marrow transplant
she was not in order to do a bone marrow
transplant you need a second remission
they got her into a second remission the
bone marrow was just about to be prepped
she relapsed so here she relapses twice
and in the standard universe this would
be considered the end
we even with all as i said a disease
that we can cure
uh this is this is considered the the
recalcitrant variant of ayl
and someone had the idea and i'll talk
about where the idea came from what if
we activate our immune system now we've
reduced her disease
with the usual standard chemotherapies
what if we could activate her immune
system and now make her own immune
system kill the cancer cells
now of course bone marrow transplant
does this but it does this in a very
crude way could we activate her immune
system very specifically and kill her
cancer cells now it turns out
in the 1980s
there was a gentleman zeleger who had
figured out a way to activate the immune
system specifically against cancer cells
this this research has been very
actively pursued and then sort of lapsed
because everyone said oh you know these
targeted therapies what a wonderful
thing they are
will be able to cure all cancers with
target therapies but now
with emma whitehead
all of a sudden she had gotten
everything and relapsed right through
and so people a group of uh
physicians scientists in philadelphia
said why don't we pick up that molecule
that ashar at al had designed in the
1980s and modify it so that now this
molecule can specifically attack her t
cells her cancer cells so this is called
chimeric antigen receptor therapy
immunological therapy against cancer
emma white had received her first dose
and in fact the agent was so active
that she had to go into the icu because
it destroyed all her cancer cells and
now released every single cellular
metabolite in her body this was a this
was the most active reagent that
everyone anyone had ever used against
cancer so she was put in the icu
and then using the traditional kind of
medical therapies
that allow us to keep these very sick
patients alive things that we learned
from the bone marrow transplant era we
were the the physicians were able to
recover her from the icu and she's still
alive today and this is about three
years after her transplant uh with these
t cells so she
is the third grandchild
of the weizmann
so this is now
we have designed some of these several
people have designed these we're now
using these in cancers diverse kinds of
cancers starting again with blood cancer
and now extending this out paradigm into
other cancers you may have seen a recent
report
in a bile duct cancer another recent
report in pancreatic cancer and the
question is how can we now
capture
this organismal aspect of cancer the
fact that cancer lives in real human
beings inside real environments and can
we add that to targeted therapy can we
add that to surgery can we add that to
cytotoxic therapy
so
it's a huge landscape we have come a
long way but there is a way long way to
go um
and so
when i like to think about this i like
to think about this as this is a puzzle
that will be with us for a long long
time it has been with us for a long long
time and it's really it is our job to
try to solve it and every generation in
which we fail to make in advance is a
generation where we will fail to to make
our pact with the future so i encourage
everyone to concentrate on this problem
it is my problem it is your problem and
try to really try to see if we can now
move to the next level or next series of
therapies against cancer to bring more
grandchildren of various institutes into
the world thank you very much
well thank you thank you very much it's
gratifying i have to say this as an
immunoviral or immunologist to see that
part now as a new opening
and that the weissman plays such a vital
part you have to realize that dr escher
doesn't get the credit this is the 70s
and to see it now come about i'm really
pleased that you cited this at the end
it's the new phase the immune response
with michael cella here being our
leading immunologist it's really a
thrill anyway first question
has there been any investigation oh
sorry thank you
i was saying you're discussing treatment
has there been any investigation or
thought given to prevention
in terms of boosting the immune system
in advance so there has been some
thought to prevention actually you know
what's interesting is to me what's
interesting personally is that the world
of prevention and cancer treatment used
to be separate silos we used to think of
them you know as as two different
buckets as it were but that's radically
changed we now know that these are
linked together and they're linked
together by the understanding of cause
so i'll give you a couple of examples
and tell you a little bit about what
happens what's happening next one
example we now know that certain cancers
you can activate those same genes those
growth controlling genes by viruses
they're uh and
for a while we thought that they were
rare but in fact it turns out they're
quite common the biggest one that we're
working on right now as as a as a large
community oncologist is of course cancer
of the cervix cervical cancer caused by
human papilloma virus now that's the
situation where we started with the
cancer
a series of investigations identified
the virus and then the genetic links
between the virus and the normal human
cell ultimately leading to a vaccine and
that is an example in which you start
off with ideas about prevention sorry
ideas about treatment and cause and work
backwards and you actually end up with
finding new kinds of prevention my point
is the following that is to say that
it is no longer sensible to think about
prevention and treatment as as as silos
particularly as opposing silos you know
there's a there used to be a time in the
1980s when people would say every dollar
you're giving to treatment is taking a
dollar away from prevention that world
is no longer with us in fact every
dollar that you investigate cancer at a
fundamental level leads to new
mechanisms of prevention and leads to
new mechanisms of treatment and we
really rethink the world that way this
is not a mutually opposed planet i'll
give you one more example of that
um brca1 positivity
uh breast cancer uh very common problem
uh very common problem in israel um
through a series of trials performed
here and in israel um the realization
was made that tamoxifen the very drug
that you can use to treat
breast cancer metastatic breast cancer
er positive breast cancer can be used as
a preventative mechanism for women with
genetic predispositions to breast cancer
not all but some women with genetic
predisposition breast cancer now is
dramatically remarkably successful in
doing that so
there is really a kind of rethinking
that's going on in terms of opening up
the black box of the cancer cell and now
trying to link prevention and treatment
at the causal level and hopefully we'll
be much more of this there'll be
there'll be a much much more integrated
effort rather than saying these two are
mutually opposing cancers because come
on we're trying to treat the same
disease in the end
another question yes in the back
wonderful book and wonderful talk thank
you um you might want to say a few words
about environmental chemical exposures
many people are interested in this
subject yep and also i wonder if you
would consider
revising the first half of your lecture
in light of the second half
namely to go from talking about cancer
in the singular
which is misled most people scientific
and lay understanding of this very large
category of very heterogeneous diseases
into talking about cancers in the plural
as you so brilliantly demonstrate it in
the second half of your same lecture
well i try to i mean
those are helpful comments i'll address
the second one first i i try to i'm
interested in the structure of knowledge
so i try to follow that structure as we
move forward i try to follow that
structure including all the errors made
and all the misconceptions made because
as i say in my book the content of
scientific knowledge changes all the
time but its form remains the same
over time in other words it is i'm
absolutely confident that we will make
even in this new
era the mistakes that we made in the
past area that's the only way we
unfortunately that human knowledge moves
forward that we keep making the same
mistakes over and over again perhaps in
a more refined way and it's skepticism
and criticism of our own work that keeps
our scientific enterprise alive so
um useful comment uh i actually like to
show the i like to show the warts as it
were uh i like to understand them myself
but you're absolutely right that that we
have now know that there is no single
cancer there are multiple cancers and to
treat them we have to think about them
as a heterogeneous series of diseases
i'll come back to the first comment
quickly
and that is to say
the issue of environmental questions is
obviously very important um we're stuck
a little bit in what i call an
epidemiological gap
and it's the following and that is that
if a if a rare
chemical exposure causes a dramatic
increase in a rare cancer a relatively
rare cancer such as
asbestos and mesothelioma
that we have very good epidemiological
devices to spot and clean up and find
if a relatively common cancer common
exposure causes an increase in a
relatively common cancer
that we can spot the problem is the
following if there's a chemical exposure
that causes let's say a 10 increase in
breast cancer
now
as a
human
carcinogen and as a public health
tragedy this would be enormous because
the denominator is enormous the number
of women with breast cancer is enormous
at 10 would be a huge number of cases
but our epidemiological tools are poor
at capturing that so there is almost
like it's like a little blind spot as it
were in in our epidemiological tools and
in fact the sad truth is that since the
1980s and 1990s we really have not found
and mark my words we really have not
found a single major chemical carcinogen
for about 15 to 20 years
we have found several carcinogens that
are very active but often cause you know
large increases in cancers but rare
cancers so that's one of our real
challenges today how do we find
the chemical carcinogens which are
present in human populations but are
causing 10 15 risks in common cancers
and since the 1990s and 19 maybe 2000s
we found a few viruses but somehow we've
not been able to find those very
effectively and i would suspect that a
that this integrative process of
epidemiology combining molecular
resources combining integrated resources
will help us do that but we haven't
really found very many
okay one short question no no one on
this side okay there please
is there much evidence of
resistance building up among cancers to
treatment in the way that we know that
there is
resistance to antibiotics and disease
and
absolutely there's this but of course
unlike because they're not infectious
the resistance doesn't happen across
populations the resistance happens
within individual humans so
i suppose you should thank someone for
small mercies because if it were
infectious then of course the resistance
would spread across from one human being
to another but cancers are largely not
infectious the virus is not withstanding
they're not largely infectious diseases
so you can't get cross-resistance across
a population what you do get however
it's a big problem is that the
individual cancer cells become resistant
to chemotherapies or even targeted
therapies and just to go back to this
idea that we were talking about before
now we are reconsidering that whole
platform as it were we're reconsidering
and saying well okay if that's the case
maybe we have to use a combination of
targeted therapies to bring down the
disease burden kill the cancer cells and
we have to have something else a
surveillance of some sort immunotherapy
or some other therapy that will that
will change the the soil that will
change the landscape and keep us from
having having that cancer come back or
other cancers come back and i think
that's the direction most people are
thinking at least in hemological cancers
whether this is successful in solid
tumors i still don't know it's a big
mystery
but i suspect we will solve it
very good thank you so much